


     PLAN9RC(8)                                             PLAN9RC(8)





     NAME
          plan9rc, ramskel, initskel - rootless boot scripts

     SYNOPSIS
          plan9rc [file]
          ramskel
          initskel

     DESCRIPTION
          After the kernel boots, it execs /boot (see boot(8)), which
          in turn execs plan9rc.  plan9rc(8) reads file if given (usu-
          ally it is not) to set up environment variables. It checks
          the $service environment variable cpu or terminal, to set
          defaults, then proceeds as an rc(1) script to bring the sys-
          tem up. It first uses paqfs(4) to mount /boot/bootpaq behind
          both /bin and /boot to access additional programs.

          plan9rc makes use of two additional scripts by default,
          ramskel and initskel. ramskel starts a ramfs(4) and loads in
          the skel.tar stored in the bootpaq, and optionally loads an
          additional user-specified .tgz from ramfs(4) also.  A
          default tools.tgz is provided by the author and recommended
          as a good default set of additional programs to have avail-
          able.

          Initskel is comparable to a cpurc(8) script which sets up
          services for the ramrooted environment. It also has interac-
          tive and non-interactive modes which follow the same envi-
          ronment variable. It's default actions are to bind standard
          devices, begin internet service if it was not already, and
          start hubfs(4) and rxexec(8) and cpu(1) and exportfs(4) lis-
          teners with listen1(8). The cpu and exportfs listener are
          started on non-standard ports to avoid conflicting with the
          main system's cpurc(8). The initskel also has non-default
          options for starting its own ndb(8) cs/dns and keyfs(4) and
          authsrv(6) if desired.

     Startup Procedures
          The script operates according to the variables found in the
          environment, usually those provided by plan9.ini(8) It exe-
          cutes fuctions in the order of

          dofactotum
                  starts factotum(4) in either cpu or terminal mode
                  according to the user's choice.

          dotryusb
                  finds out if the system is booting to a usb volume
                  and starts partfs(8) if so











     PLAN9RC(8)                                             PLAN9RC(8)



          doramsetup
                  is done from /boot/skel.tar and may also make use of
                  /n/9fat/tools.tgz

          dochecksys
                  is made to verify that a user/hostowner and system
                  name are in place

          dostartventi
                  will begin a venti(8) server if specified by the
                  $venti environment variable.

          dogetrootfs
                  will either begin a disk fileserver or dial a tcp
                  root fileserver

          doinistscript
                  runs the initskel script to create a self-sufficient
                  environment to cpu(1) into for service and adminis-
                  trative access to the layer below the root filesys-
                  tem.

          dorootstart
                  will begin either the cpurc(8) or termrc(8) from the
                  rootfs. These scripts are launched using newns(8) to
                  create a normal user environment independent of the
                  namespace of plan9rc.

          staylocal
                  allows the user to retain access if desired to the
                  programs in the bootpaq and/or tools.tgz, or choose
                  no to drop down to kernel-device only namespace.

     VARIABLES
          The plan9rc script makes use of standard variables from
          plan9.ini(8) and also new variables. Both types of vari-
          ables, and their default behaviors, are listed.

          interactive
                  determines the mode of operation for plan9rc. By
                  default, or if set to "traditional", it will behave
                  towards the user almost identically to the original
                  plan9 bootup, but will still set up the rootless
                  environment. If set to "yes" then the user will be
                  prompted interactively through the boot process and
                  given the option to alter any and all plan9.ini(8)
                  variable settings. If set to "no" the user will not
                  be prompted at all and the boot process proceeds in
                  automated fashion according to the environment vari-
                  ables.

          bootargs










     PLAN9RC(8)                                             PLAN9RC(8)



                  determines the method for connecting to a root fs.
                  tcp [internet config parameters] or local![path to
                  disk root fs] are the standard values here. The new
                  option srv implies the user will arrange to have a
                  file in /srv suitable for use as a root file system.

          ipparams
                  optional parameter arguments to ipconfig(8). This is
                  another way of setting these values directly rather
                  than the somewhat convoluted methods (which are
                  still supported) described in boot(8)

          factotum
                  type of factotum(4) [cpu terminal debug]

          sysname standard $sysname definition

          fs      standard $fs address from plan9.ini(8) needed for
                  tcp booting

          auth    standard $auth address for tcp booting

          venti   standard $venti address variable from plan9.ini(8)

          fossil  location of fossil(4) partition on disk

          cfs     location of cfs(4) partition on disk

          ramsetup
                  program to set up ramfs(4) for bootscripts, defaults
                  to [ramskel]

          initscript
                  miniature cpurc(8) equivalent script for the ramroot
                  namespaces, defaults to [initskel]

          startventi
                  set to "yes" to start the venti(8) server. This will
                  be automatically set to yes if a $venti variable is
                  found beginning with #S which implies venti(8)
                  should be started from the local disk.

          bootsrv this is usually a derivative variable determined by
                  the attachment to a root fileserver. If the user
                  chooses "srv" as their boot method plan9rc will use
                  an existing file in /srv for the root. This mode is
                  used mostly if plan9rc is launching a new namespace
                  subsequent to the initial boot up.

          namespace
                  namespace for starting initscript, defaults to
                  [namespace]










     PLAN9RC(8)                                             PLAN9RC(8)



          rootstart
                  whether or not to start cpurc(8) or termrc(8)
                  scripts from mounted root [cpu terminal]

          staylocal
                  whether to stay within the namespace of the plan9rc
                  script on the console, set "no" to drop back to only
                  kernel devices [yes]

          afterfact
                  command to execute after starting factotum(8) (hap-
                  pens before everything else), not used by default

          afterroot
                  command to execute after mounting rootfs but before
                  initscript or cpurc(8) or termrc(8) not used by
                  default

        Initskel and ramskel variables
          Variables for the other two scripts used by rootless bootup
          are also described here. Their meaning and default values
          are as follows.

          tgzfs
               name of optional .tgz to load into the ramdisk. I pro-
               vide a recommended tools.tgz but this value is not set
               by default. This value is used by ramskel while the
               rest are all for initskel.

          binddevs
               by default initskel will bind(1) the devices ( f t m v
               L P u U '$' Σ κ ). Set this to no to disable this.

          hostfactotum
               by default the ramroot namespace makes use of the sys-
               tem wide factotum(8). Set this to no to enable running
               a private factotum(8) for this namespace. You will be
               prompted for the values to set for the key and auth-
               server address.

          netsvc
               by default initskel will issue an ipconfig(8) command
               if internet service has not already been started. Set
               no to disable this.

          hostcsdns
               by default the factotum(4) in the ramroot environment
               will use the host system ndb(8) cs and dns for connec-
               tion information. Set no to disable this and start a cs
               and dns server within the service namespace.

          cpusvc










     PLAN9RC(8)                                             PLAN9RC(8)



               by default initskel will start a cpu(1) listener and an
               rexexec(8) listener. Set no to disable this.

          cpuport
               this sets the numeric port used for the cpu(1) lis-
               tener. It is set to [17060] by default to avoid con-
               flict with the host system cpu(1) listener.

          hubsvc
               by default a hubfs(4) server is started and an rc con-
               nected to it. Set no to disable this.

          unprivileged
               by default the ramroot environment does not provide
               auth services. Set no to start a keyfs(4) and
               authsrv(6) using /n/9fat/adm.

     FILES
          /boot/plan9rc  bootup and namespace launching control script
          /boot/ramskel  sets up /boot/skel.tar as a ramfs skeleton
                         along with an optional tools.tgz from /n/9fat
          /boot/initskel cpurc(8) analog script for access to the
                         rootless environment

     SOURCE
          sources/contrib/mycroftiv/rootlessnext/bootdir.extras

     SEE ALSO
          srv(4), namespace(6), boot(8), listen(8)

     BUGS
          The Plan 9 kernel handles variables in #ec and #e differ-
          ently. This may cause unexpected results if variables set in
          plan9.ini are manipulated and control passes to subscripts.

























